In this painting, the Ravi River splits the frame into three thirds with distinct attributes.
This scene illustrates the moment that Akbar notices that two of his attendants failed to cross the Ravi River to get into Lahore.
According to the story, Akbar placed his trust in the Gods “and put his steed to the river.”
While the river swept gently over Akbar and his steed, the gods were not so kind to Yesawal and Nur Muhammad,
the two important figures which are shown drowning in the river.
Akbar is said to have spent the following days tending to the justices required for the status of his late attendants, as that was his nature.
In this scene, Akbar rides a white horse adorned with the intricately embroidered saddle, appropriate for his rank, and golden jewelry.
He is armed only with his gilded katar which, in combination with the absence of other weapons in the scene, would imply the safety of his company.
In the painting, Akbar appears to be expressing his dismay to the only person who separates him from the drowning people in the river.
Because of the exchange on the riverbank, Akbar is depicted as empathetic with the people on both banks who are distraught from the event.
In the bottom right of the painting, Akbar's previous entourage appears blissfully disconnected from the events transpiring behind them.
As they are the closest members in the frame to the event, their ignorance is highlighted by
the rest of the people depicted in the scene who are clearly reacting to the events as they are transpiring.
The composition of the painting, done by La’l
directs the focal points of the scene from Akbar, and the man on the shore,
to the conflict of the drowning figures, and into
the resolution of the composition in the contrast of the aristocracy to the ordinary people.
Another contrast in the midst of the scene is how Akbar is depicted in order to selectively concentrate the viewer’s focus onto Akbar.
By placing Akbar in the centre of the painting on a white horse, above anyone else near the center of the painting,
and specifically away from anyone else with as large a silhouette, the painters distinguished Akbar as the intended initial focal point of the piece.
By setting Akbar as the initial focal point, the story of the drowning men is framed initially from Akbar’s perspective.
Thus in the resolution, where the aristocracy is depicted as disconnected from the events around them, Akbar’s connection to the scene,
and the empathy that he expresses, is the story that is immortalized on this painting.